docs: ADR 069 - `x/gov` modularity, multiple choice and optimistic proposal (#18498)
cosmos/cosmos-sdk: docs/architecture/adr-069-gov-improvements.md

An expedited optimistic proposal and an expedited multiple choice proposal do not make sense based on the definition above and is a proposal type instead of a proposal characteristic.

#### Optimistic Proposal

An optimistic proposal is a proposal that automatically passes unless a threshold a NO votes is reached.

Voter can only vote NO on the proposal. If the NO threshold is reached, the optimistic proposal is converted to a normal proposal.

Two governance parameters will be in added [`v1.Params`][5] to support optimistic proposals:

```protobuf
// optimistic_authorized_addreses is an optional governance parameter that limits the authorized accounts than can submit optimisitc proposals
repeated string optimistic_authorized_addreses = 17 [(cosmos_proto.scalar) = "cosmos.AddressString"];

// Optimistic rejected threshold defines at which percentage of NO votes, the optimistic proposal should fail and be converted to a normal proposal.
string optimistic_rejected_threshold = 18 [(cosmos_proto.scalar) = "cosmos.Dec"];
```

#### Multiple Choice Proposal

A multiple choice proposal is a proposal where the voting options can be defined by the proposer.

> The number of voting option will be limited to a maximum of 4. A new vote option `SPAM` will be added and distinguished of those voting options. 

Reviewer: Why limit to 4? I agree with limiting the number of options, but why not 6 or 8?

Reviewer: Oh, I think I got it, this is because you want to keep the existing tally function which only handles 4 options.

Author: That would indeed simplify everything if we keep it 4, but we can maybe consider increasing it, if it is really wanted.

Reviewer: Not sure if it's really wanted, but for sure this is a smart way to bring the feature with minimal changes :+1:

Reviewer 2: I think it really depends how this feature would be practically used.

Have you guys thought of some example proposals that would be suited to use the multiple choices and how they may fit within the 4 options limits? Maybe worth providing these examples in the ADR (just a bulleted list)?
 
Off the top of my head, I could see e.g. voting on electing group of peoples for some task. And the options might be different sets of candidates, in which case limiting it to 4 kinda makes sense since I assume we also want to not overwhelm the voters.

I also like the fact that we are reusing the existing VoteOption a lot. No point in adding complexity if not needed.

I am missing an aspect, how do you handle the case when the proposer wants to have less than 4 options, say 3?

Author: This feature will be used for signaling proposals (given that a multiple choice won't execute any message).
This leaves to many possibilities: choosing the canonical bridge for a chain, elections as you said, or surveys (hopefully not too much 😅)

Voting on multiple choice proposal will make an extra query to get the options. That way, we will be able to refuse non set options.

Reviewer 2: > This feature will be used for signaling proposals (given that a multiple choice won't execute any message).

Yeah, I appreciated a lot that this is just for text proposals. 

> This leaves to many possibilities: choosing the canonical bridge for a chain, elections as you said, or surveys (hopefully not too much 😅),..

Right, and if the community is civil enough they should be able to boil down the final choices to go on-chain to a max of 4 using forum discussions. 

He knew it
<img src="https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/assets/12249307/40d97568-d781-4914-b1cd-f59a4e5fdd09" width="200">

Jokes aside, I think it's better to implement the feature reusing as much of the existing as possible for now as you are planning. We don't need to overcomplicate things unless there's an explicit need, and until this feature is out and tested in the field we can't really know.

> Voting on multiple choice proposal will make an extra query to get the options. That way, we will be able to refuse non set options.

This makes sense, thanks.

Submitting a new multiple choice proposal will use a different message than the [`v1.MsgSubmitProposal`][5]. This is done in order to simplify the proposal submittion and allow defining the voting options directly.

```protobuf
message MsgSubmitMultipleChoiceProposal {
  repeated cosmos.base.v1beta1.Coin initial_deposit = 1
  string proposer = 2 [(cosmos_proto.scalar) = "cosmos.AddressString"];
  string metadata = 3;
  string title = 4;
  string summary = 5;
  VoteOption option_one = 6;
  VoteOption option_two = 7;
  VoteOption option_three = 8;
  VoteOption option_four = 9;
}
```

Voters can only vote on the defined options in the proposal.

To maintain compatibility with the existing endpoints, the voting options will not be stored in the proposal itself. A multiple choice proposal will be stored as a [`v1.Proposal`][5]. A query will be available for multiple choice proposal types to get the voting options.

Multiple choice proposals do not need additional governance parameters.

### Votes

As mentioned above [multiple choice proposal](#multiple-choice-proposal) will introduce an additional vote option: `SPAM`.

This vote option will be supported by all proposal types.

> Voting `SPAM` will automatically burn the proposal deposit and mark the proposal as failed.

Reviewer: I found this sentence confusing, it sounds like the trigger is the SPAM vote when it is the SPAM mark, and it also suggests that this happens immediately when it happens at the end of the voting period.

```suggestion
At the end of the voting period, if a proposal is marked as `SPAM`, its deposit is burned and it fails.
```

`SPAM` differs from the `No with Veto` vote as its threshold is dynamic.
A proposal is marked as `SPAM` when the total of weighted votes for all options is lower than the amount of weighted vote on `SPAM`

> (`spam` > `option_one + option_two + option_three + option_four` = proposal marked as spam).

Reviewer: What happens if the first vote on the proposal is a SPAM vote? I suppose it won't be marked as SPAM right away, will it?

Author: Currently clients are using the hack of not displaying proposals with a high number of NWV. This allows them to only filter by spam proposal.
A proposal will be marked as spam when tallying at the end of the voting period, so the fact the first voter votes SPAM does not matter.

Reviewer: OK, I thought the SPAM mark was immediate and interrupted the voting period. I think what confused me is this sentence:

> Voting `SPAM` will automatically burn the proposal deposit and mark the proposal as failed.

I interpret *automatically* as *immediately*. Thanks for the correction.

> To avoid voters wrongfully voting down a proposal as `SPAM`, voters will be slashed 2% of their voting stake if they voted `SPAM` on a proposal that wasn't a spam proposal.

Reviewer: Does this include validators and their delegations? 

While I understand the need to protect this SPAM vote, this is a very harsh sanction, can you explain how you came up with that ?

Reviewer 3: Lets set this to 0% by default and make it a parameter. Chains can decide to handle it accordingly

Additionally, the SDK should allow chains to customize the tallying method of proposals (if they want to count the votes in another way). Currently, the Cosmos SDK counts votes proportionally to the voting power/stake. However, custom tallying could allow counting votes with a quadratic function instead.

## Decision

`x/gov` will integrate these functions and extract helpers and interfaces for extending the `x/gov` module capabilities.

### Proposals

Currently, all proposals are [`v1.Proposal`][5]. Optimistic and multiple choice proposals require a different tally logic, but the rest of the proposal stays the same to not create other proposal types, `v1.Proposal` will have an extra field:

```protobuf
enum ProposalType {
  NORMAL = 0;
  MULTIPLE_CHOICE = 1;
  OPTIMISTIC = 2;
  EXPEDITED = 3;
}
```

Note, that expedited becomes a proposal type itself instead of a boolean on the `v1.Proposal` struct.

> An expedited proposal is by design a normal proposal with a quicker voting period and higher threshold. When an expedited proposal fails, it gets converted to a normal proposal.   

> An expedited optimistic proposal and an expedited multiple choice proposal do not make sense based on the definition above and is a proposal type instead of a proposal characteristic.

Author: This one already exists, this is for context.

#### Optimistic Proposal

An optimistic proposal is a proposal that passes unless a threshold a NO votes is reached.

> Voter can only vote NO on the proposal. If the NO threshold is reached, the optimistic proposal is converted to a normal proposal.

Author: Sure, when the proposal is tallied and rejected, basically a new `STANDARD` proposal will be created.
Expedited proposals have this behavior too.

Two governance parameters will be in added [`v1.Params`][5] to support optimistic proposals:

```protobuf
// optimistic_authorized_addreses is an optional governance parameter that limits the authorized accounts than can submit optimisitc proposals

> repeated string optimistic_authorized_addreses = 17 [(cosmos_proto.scalar) = "cosmos.AddressString"];

Author: Limiting who is allowed to submit optimistic proposals (say only devs addresses)

string burn_spam_amount = 8 [(cosmos_proto.scalar) = "cosmos.Dec"];
```

Additionally, the current vote options will be renamed to better accommodate the multiple choice proposal:

```protobuf
// VoteOption enumerates the valid vote options for a given governance proposal.
enum VoteOption {
  VOTE_OPTION_UNSPECIFIED = 0;
  VOTE_OPTION_ONE = 1;
  VOTE_OPTION_TWO = 2;
  VOTE_OPTION_THREE = 3;
  VOTE_OPTION_FOUR = 4;
  VOTE_OPTION_SPAM = 5;
}
```

The order does not change for a normal proposal (1 = yes, 2 = abstain, 3 = no, 4 = no with veto as it was). We will attempt to make this change in a non-breaking way for clients (cli and wallets).

Updating vote options means updating [`v1.TallyResult`][5] as well.

#### Tally

Due to the vote option change, each proposal can have the same tallying method.

However, chains may want to change the tallying function (weighted vote per voting power) of `x/gov` for a different algorithm (using a quadratic function on the voter stake, for instance).

The custom tallying function can be passed to the `x/gov` keeper with the following interface:

```go

> type Tally interface{

Reviewer 4: I need to think a bit more of what exactly we need but at a high level you should be able to process a custom result with the voting power that has voted so far

Reviewer 3: > at a high level you should be able to process a custom result with the voting power that has voted so far

could you elaborate here? I dont understand what you mean

    // to be decided
    Calculate() govv1.TallyResult

>     Pass() bool

Reviewer 4: nit, make the method more verbose. It's not intuitive what "passes"

Multiple choice proposals, contrary to any other proposal type, cannot have messages to execute. They are only text proposals.

Submitting a new multiple choice proposal will use a different message than the [`v1.MsgSubmitProposal`][5]. This is done in order to simplify the proposal submittion and allow defining the voting options directly.

```protobuf
message MsgSubmitMultipleChoiceProposal {
  repeated cosmos.base.v1beta1.Coin initial_deposit = 1
  string proposer = 2 [(cosmos_proto.scalar) = "cosmos.AddressString"];
  string metadata = 3;
  string title = 4;
  string summary = 5;
  string option_one = 6;
  string option_two = 7;
  string option_three = 8;
  string option_four = 9;
}
```

Voters can only vote on the defined options in the proposal.

To maintain compatibility with the existing endpoints, the voting options will not be stored in the proposal itself and each option will be mapped to [`v1.VoteOption`][5]. A multiple choice proposal will be stored as a [`v1.Proposal`][5]. A query will be available for multiple choice proposal types to get the voting options.

> Multiple choice proposals do not need additional governance parameters.

Reviewer: Is this still true with the recent addition of the `burn_spam_amount` param?

Author: good one ty!

Those two types are, namely: multiple choice proposals and optimistic proposals.

## Context

`x/gov` is the center of Cosmos governance, and has already been improved from its first version `v1beta1`, with a second version [`v1`][5].
This second iteration on gov unlocked many possibilities by letting governance proposals contain any number of proposals.
The last addition of gov has been expedited proposals (proposals that have a shorter voting period and a higher quorum, approval threshold).

The community requested ([1], [4]) two additional proposals for improving governance choices. Those proposals would be useful when having protocol decisions made on specific choices or simplifying regular proposals that do not require high community involvement.

Additionally, the SDK should allow chains to customize the tallying method of proposals (if they want to count the votes in another way). Currently, the Cosmos SDK counts votes proportionally to the voting power/stake. However, custom tallying could allow counting votes with a quadratic function instead.

## Alternatives

> N/A

Reviewer 5: I would leave this section out entirely if there's nothing to note.

## Decision

> `x/gov` will integrate those functionalities and extract helpers and interfaces for extending the `x/gov` module capabilities.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
`x/gov` will integrate these functions and extract helpers and interfaces for extending the `x/gov` module capabilities.
```

### Proposals

> Currently, all proposals are [`v1.Proposal`][5]. Optimistic and multiple choice proposals only require a different tally logic, but the rest of the proposal stays the same to not create other proposal types, `v1.Proposal` will have an extra field:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Currently, all proposals are [`v1.Proposal`][5]. Optimistic and multiple choice proposals require a different tally logic, but the rest of the proposal stays the same to not create other proposal types, `v1.Proposal` will have an extra field:
```

```protobuf
enum ProposalType {
  // NORMAL defines a normal propo
  NORMAL = 0;
  // VOTE_OPTION_YES defines a yes vote option.
  MULTIPLE_CHOICE = 1;
  // VOTE_OPTION_ABSTAIN defines an abstain vote option.
  OPTIMISTIC = 2;
  // VOTE_OPTION_NO defines a no vote option.

>   EXPEDITED = 3;

Reviewer 5: The comments seem to be off?

}
```

Note, that expedited becomes a proposal type itself instead of a boolean on the `v1.Proposal` struct.

> An expedited proposal is by design a normal proposal with a quicker voting period and higher threshold. A expedited proposals if fail, gets converted to a normal proposal

An expedited optimistic proposal and an expedited multiple choice proposal do not make sense based on the definition above and is a proposal type instead of a proposal characteristic.

#### Optimistic Proposal

An optimistic proposal is a proposal that automatically passes unless a threshold a NO votes is reached.

Voter can only vote NO on the proposal. If the NO threshold is reached, the optimistic proposal is converted to a normal proposal.

Two governance parameters will be in added [`v1.Params`][5] to support optimistic proposals:

```protobuf
// optimistic_authorized_addreses is an optional governance parameter that limits the authorized accounts than can submit optimisitc proposals

> repeated string optimistic_authorized_addreses = 17 [(cosmos_proto.scalar) = "cosmos.AddressString"];

Reviewer 5: What's the expected usage around this being initially set? Who do you imagine being in this list?

Author: A list of authorized address to not allow everyone to submit an optimistic proposal, if wished by the chain.

> // Optimistic rejected threshold defines at which percentage of NO votes, the optimistic proposal should fail and be converted to a normal proposal.

Reviewer 5: Are optimistic props subject to the same VP? So if enough NO votes come in at the last second, it then gets converted to a normal prop and the entire VP starts again?

Author: There will be just one option, which will be no. So nothing can come second. You won't be able to vote yes or abstain.

An expedited optimistic proposal and an expedited multiple choice proposal do not make sense based on the definition above and is a proposal type instead of a proposal characteristic.

#### Optimistic Proposal

An optimistic proposal is a proposal that passes unless a threshold a NO votes is reached.

Voter can only vote NO on the proposal. If the NO threshold is reached, the optimistic proposal is converted to a standard proposal.

Two governance parameters will be in added [`v1.Params`][5] to support optimistic proposals:

```protobuf
// optimistic_authorized_addreses is an optional governance parameter that limits the authorized accounts than can submit optimisitc proposals
repeated string optimistic_authorized_addreses = 17 [(cosmos_proto.scalar) = "cosmos.AddressString"];

// Optimistic rejected threshold defines at which percentage of NO votes, the optimistic proposal should fail and be converted to a standard proposal.
string optimistic_rejected_threshold = 18 [(cosmos_proto.scalar) = "cosmos.Dec"];
```

#### Multiple Choice Proposal

A multiple choice proposal is a proposal where the voting options can be defined by the proposer.

> The number of voting option will be limited to a maximum of 4.

Reviewer 6: Seems arbitrary. What is the reasoning here?

Seems like you would need the vote tallying to be processable within a single Endblocker, and you don't want the options to add to state bloat or spam, but given this, 4 seems low.

Author: https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/pull/18498#discussion_r1398487718

The reasoning is to keep the voting options the same (https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/blob/f53cfe2a0c1f4e4c06500468a219b60b02bf7e85/proto/cosmos/gov/v1/gov.proto#L16), we would only need to rename the enum.

Submitting a new multiple choice proposal will use a different message than the [`v1.MsgSubmitProposal`][5]. This is done in order to simplify the proposal submittion and allow defining the voting options directly.

```protobuf
message MsgSubmitMultipleChoiceProposal {
  repeated cosmos.base.v1beta1.Coin initial_deposit = 1
  string proposer = 2 [(cosmos_proto.scalar) = "cosmos.AddressString"];
  string metadata = 3;
  string title = 4;
  string summary = 5;
  string option_one = 6;
  string option_two = 7;
  string option_three = 8;
  string option_four = 9;
}
```

Voters can only vote on the defined options in the proposal.

To maintain compatibility with the existing endpoints, the voting options will not be stored in the proposal itself and each option will be mapped to [`v1.VoteOption`][5]. A multiple choice proposal will be stored as a [`v1.Proposal`][5]. A query will be available for multiple choice proposal types to get the voting options.

### Votes

As mentioned above [multiple choice proposal](#multiple-choice-proposal) will introduce an additional vote option: `SPAM`.

This vote option will be supported by all proposal types.

> At the end of the voting period, if a proposal is voted as `SPAM`, its fails and its deposit is burned.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
At the end of the voting period, if a proposal is voted as `SPAM`, it fails and its deposit is burned.
```

`SPAM` differs from the `No with Veto` vote as its threshold is dynamic.
A proposal is marked as `SPAM` when the total of weighted votes for all options is lower than the amount of weighted vote on `SPAM`

> (`spam` > `option_one + option_two + option_three + option_four` = proposal marked as spam).

Reviewer 5: Is tallying done at the end of the VP (EndBlock)?

Author: Yes. Tallying stays in end blocker in this ADR. Future improvements will attempt to make it lazy.

An expedited optimistic proposal and an expedited multiple choice proposal do not make sense based on the definition above and is a proposal type instead of a proposal characteristic.

#### Optimistic Proposal

An optimistic proposal is a proposal that passes unless a threshold a NO votes is reached.

Voter can only vote NO on the proposal. If the NO threshold is reached, the optimistic proposal is converted to a standard proposal.

Two governance parameters will be in added [`v1.Params`][5] to support optimistic proposals:

```protobuf
// optimistic_authorized_addreses is an optional governance parameter that limits the authorized accounts than can submit optimisitc proposals
repeated string optimistic_authorized_addreses = 17 [(cosmos_proto.scalar) = "cosmos.AddressString"];

// Optimistic rejected threshold defines at which percentage of NO votes, the optimistic proposal should fail and be converted to a standard proposal.
string optimistic_rejected_threshold = 18 [(cosmos_proto.scalar) = "cosmos.Dec"];
```

#### Multiple Choice Proposal

> A multiple choice proposal is a proposal where the voting options can be defined by the proposer.

Reviewer 2: I am not really a fan of the fact that the options can only be set by the proposer. It relies on the proposer being fair in setting them. But definitely doing anything different would add a lot of complexity and it's not guaranteed to have any benefit.

A voter that is not agreeing with any option - and want none of them to pass - but does not want to abuse the SPAM vote can only choose to not vote, and try to keep the quorum lower than the threshold. 
Maybe this is enough, but maybe not?

Reviewer 2: Yeah, the voting option discovery should be done on the forum, completely agree with that, and ideally it's what makes the most sense.
I am just a little skeptical that it'll work like this all the times, and it might be very controversial when it doesn't.

  string metadata = 3;
  string title = 4;
  string summary = 5;
  string option_one = 6;
  string option_two = 7;
  string option_three = 8;
  string option_four = 9;
}
```

Voters can only vote on the defined options in the proposal.

To maintain compatibility with the existing endpoints, the voting options will not be stored in the proposal itself and each option will be mapped to [`v1.VoteOption`][5]. A multiple choice proposal will be stored as a [`v1.Proposal`][5]. A query will be available for multiple choice proposal types to get the voting options.

### Votes

As mentioned above [multiple choice proposal](#multiple-choice-proposal) will introduce an additional vote option: `SPAM`.

This vote option will be supported by all proposal types.
At the end of the voting period, if a proposal is voted as `SPAM`, it fails and its deposit is burned.

`SPAM` differs from the `No with Veto` vote as its threshold is dynamic.
A proposal is marked as `SPAM` when the total of weighted votes for all options is lower than the amount of weighted vote on `SPAM`
(`spam` > `option_one + option_two + option_three + option_four` = proposal marked as spam).

> To avoid voters wrongfully voting down a proposal as `SPAM`, voters will be slashed `x`% (default 0%) of their voting stake if they voted `SPAM` on a proposal that wasn't a spam proposal. The parameter allows to incentivise voters to only vote `SPAM` on actual spam proposals and not use `SPAM` as a way to vote `No with Veto` with a different threshold.

Author: Right but NWV should be 33% or voting power not of weighted votes.

If the quorum is 10% and a proposal just reached quorum, 50% is 5% of VP.

> To avoid voters wrongfully voting down a proposal as `SPAM`, voters will be slashed `x`% (default 0%) of their voting stake if they voted `SPAM` on a proposal that wasn't a spam proposal. The parameter allows to incentivise voters to only vote `SPAM` on actual spam proposals and not use `SPAM` as a way to vote `No with Veto` with a different threshold.

Reviewer 2: Wait, is this true?
https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/blob/main/x/gov/keeper/tally.go#L147

Isn't `totalVotingPower` the total of VP that votes? Used also to compute quorum against `totalBonded` which is the total staked VP: https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/blob/main/x/gov/keeper/tally.go#L134

So in your example, in a regular prop with 10% quorum and that just reached quorum, you need 33% of 10% to have the prop vetoed so 3.3% VP.

Please correct me if I am wrong.

> To avoid voters wrongfully voting down a proposal as `SPAM`, voters will be slashed `x`% (default 0%) of their voting stake if they voted `SPAM` on a proposal that wasn't a spam proposal. The parameter allows to incentivise voters to only vote `SPAM` on actual spam proposals and not use `SPAM` as a way to vote `No with Veto` with a different threshold.

Reviewer 2: Hmm, well 33% of total bonded would be 7% less than 40% which is the current quorum. I think it's unreasonable to have NWV be that much.
I think minority protection is important, and NWV shouldn't just be used to punish spam proposals.
So the way it's implemented rn is fine for me (33% of total VP that actually votes). 

I do think though NWV now is broken in any case. It's just a freely available oversized NO, with no associated cost.
It should be equally slashed when used and the proposal is not veoted IMHO. Right now there is no cost to voting NWV instead of NO, except the potential social backlash/pressure.

> To avoid voters wrongfully voting down a proposal as `SPAM`, voters will be slashed `x`% (default 0%) of their voting stake if they voted `SPAM` on a proposal that wasn't a spam proposal. The parameter allows to incentivise voters to only vote `SPAM` on actual spam proposals and not use `SPAM` as a way to vote `No with Veto` with a different threshold.

Author: For sure 33% would be unfair if the participation is low. We could have a parameter that let chains define the veto threshold as a percentage of the bonded token, with a maximum of 33%. Anyway, let's keep this discussion for a potential RFC.

> To avoid voters wrongfully voting down a proposal as `SPAM`, voters will be slashed `x`% (default 0%) of their voting stake if they voted `SPAM` on a proposal that wasn't a spam proposal. The parameter allows to incentivise voters to only vote `SPAM` on actual spam proposals and not use `SPAM` as a way to vote `No with Veto` with a different threshold.

Reviewer 2: I definitely don't want to drag the discussion on NWV here, it's out of scope.
[But I want to note that even the documentation of `x/gov` is consistent with the code, counting NWV against the total votes and not the total bonded https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/blame/main/x/gov/README.md#L473]

I still think though that having a 50% threshold for SPAM and slashing if this threshold is not reached is too harsh without an explicit and always present NO option, and a consequently lower threshold for SPAM.
I am not completely against doing it the way you propose now, but I have some slight doubts so I wanted to share them.

> To avoid voters wrongfully voting down a proposal as `SPAM`, voters will be slashed `x`% (default 0%) of their voting stake if they voted `SPAM` on a proposal that wasn't a spam proposal. The parameter allows to incentivise voters to only vote `SPAM` on actual spam proposals and not use `SPAM` as a way to vote `No with Veto` with a different threshold.

Author: The idea is that if there is a big amount of other votes, it is most probably not a spam proposal, so it makes sense that the more votes there is the harder it is to mark a proposal as spam.

> To avoid voters wrongfully voting down a proposal as `SPAM`, voters will be slashed `x`% (default 0%) of their voting stake if they voted `SPAM` on a proposal that wasn't a spam proposal. The parameter allows to incentivise voters to only vote `SPAM` on actual spam proposals and not use `SPAM` as a way to vote `No with Veto` with a different threshold.

Reviewer 2: Yep, and that's why it sorta makes sense to me even the way you propose now. I mean the true spam proposals usually have super high percentages of NWV, well above the veto threshold, this being true on any chain I know of. I would expect that SPAM votes would be much higher than anything else for clear spam.

Tbh I am probably overthinking this part, well for once because I was comparing with NWV on the regular props, and secondly because of the absence of an explicit way to express disagreement with all of the proposed options  (assuming failure of the off-chain vote-option discovery), which is in fact a different aspect.

// All proposal types are v1.Proposal which have different voting periods or tallying logic.
enum ProposalType {
  // PROPOSAL_TYPE_UNSPECIFIED defines no proposal type, which fallback to PROPOSAL_TYPE_STANDARD.
  PROPOSAL_TYPE_UNSPECIFIED = 0;
  // PROPOSAL_TYPE_STANDARD defines the type for a standard proposal.
  PROPOSAL_TYPE_STANDARD = 1;
  // PROPOSAL_TYPE_MULTIPLE_CHOICE defines the type for a multiple choice proposal.
  PROPOSAL_TYPE_MULTIPLE_CHOICE = 2;
  // PROPOSAL_TYPE_OPTIMISTIC defines the type for an optimistic proposal.
  PROPOSAL_TYPE_OPTIMISTIC = 3;
  // PROPOSAL_TYPE_EXPEDITED defines the type for an expedited proposal.
  PROPOSAL_TYPE_EXPEDITED = 4;
}
```

Note, that expedited becomes a proposal type itself instead of a boolean on the `v1.Proposal` struct.

> An expedited proposal is by design a standard proposal with a quicker voting period and higher threshold. When an expedited proposal fails, it gets converted to a standard proposal.   

An expedited optimistic proposal and an expedited multiple choice proposal do not make sense based on the definition above and is a proposal type instead of a proposal characteristic.

#### Optimistic Proposal

> An optimistic proposal is a proposal that passes unless a threshold a NO votes is reached.

Reviewer 7: What is the intended use case?

Author: A chain can decide how they want to use it (given the possibility to restrict proposers).
However, we can think of it as a way to alleviate governance burden for recurring proposals or any boring proposals where no governance discussion needs to be involved. In the case of Osmosis, that would be periodic incentive updates for example. I have no example for the Hub however 😅

  VOTE_OPTION_ABSTAIN = 2;
  // VOTE_OPTION_THREE defines the third proposal vote option.
  VOTE_OPTION_THREE = 3;
  // VOTE_OPTION_NO defines the no proposal vote option.
  VOTE_OPTION_NO = 3;
  // VOTE_OPTION_FOUR defines the fourth proposal vote option.
  VOTE_OPTION_FOUR = 4;
  // VOTE_OPTION_NO_WITH_VETO defines the no with veto proposal vote option.
  VOTE_OPTION_NO_WITH_VETO = 4;
  // VOTE_OPTION_SPAM defines the spam proposal vote option.
  VOTE_OPTION_SPAM = 5;
}
```

The order does not change for a standard proposal (1 = yes, 2 = abstain, 3 = no, 4 = no with veto as it was) and the aliased enum can be used interchangeably.

Updating vote options means updating [`v1.TallyResult`][5] as well.

#### Tally

Due to the vote option change, each proposal can have the same tallying method.

However, chains may want to change the tallying function (weighted vote per voting power) of `x/gov` for a different algorithm (using a quadratic function on the voter stake, for instance).

The custom tallying function can be passed to the `x/gov` keeper with the following interface:

```go
type Tally interface{
    // to be decided

    // Calculate calculates the tally result

>     Calculate(proposal v1.Proposal, govKeeper GovKeeper, stakingKeeper StakingKeeper) govv1.TallyResult

Reviewer 8: I think Tally could be simplified to `Tally(ctx context.Context, govKeeper GovKeeper, prop v1.Proposal) (govv1.TallyResult, error)` 

I assume Tally could be a module's keeper implementing this interface and already holding within it other keepers besides gov. Passing GovKeeper in instead of having it in the tally implementer avoids circular dependencies between the tally interface and gov itself.

Author: The GovKeeper does not have the other keeps it uses public.
Which I think is good, we will be able to remove staking from the gov keeper as well altogether because it is only used for tallying.
